src/reference/antora/modules/ROOT/pages/cloudevents-transform.adoc, before:

[[cloudevents-transformer]]

= CloudEvent Transformer

[[introduction]]
== Introduction

The CloudEvent transformer converts Spring Integration messages into CloudEvent compliant messages.
This transformer provides  support for the CloudEvents specification v1.0 with configurable output formats, header pattern matching, and extension management.

[[cloudevent-transformer-overview]]
=== Overview

The CloudEvent transformer (`ToCloudEventTransformer`) extends Spring Integration's `AbstractTransformer` to convert messages to CloudEvent format.
To do this, it uses a `FormatStrategy` that allows users to transform the message to the desired "CloudEvent" format (CloudEvent, JSON, XML, AVRO, etc).  It defaults to `CloudEventFormatStrategy`.

[[cloudevent-transformer-conversion-types]]
=== Format Strategy

The `ToCloudEventTransformer` accepts classes that implement the `FormatStrategy`  to serialize CloudEvent data to formats other than the default `CloudEventMessageFormatStrategy`.

[[configure-transformer]]
=== Configuring Transformer

The `ToCloudEventTransformer` class provides configurations for CloudEvent metadata and formatting options.

==== Properties Configuration

[source,java]
----
ToCloudEventTransformer cloudEventTransformer = new ToCloudEventTransformer();
cloudEventTransformer.setId("event-123");                                    // The CloudEvent ID. Default is "".
cloudEventTransformer.setSource(URI.create("https://example.com/source"));   // The event source. Default is "".
cloudEventTransformer.setType("com.example.OrderCreated");                   // The event type. The Default is "".
cloudEventTransformer.setDataContentType("application/json");                // The data content type. Default is null.
cloudEventTransformer.setDataSchema(URI.create("https://example.com/schema")); // The data schema. Default is null.
cloudEventTransformer.setSubject("order-processing");                        // The event subject. Default is null.
cloudEventTransformer.setTime(OffsetDateTime.now());                         // The event time. Default is null.
----

[[cloudevent-properties-defaults]]
==== Default Values

|===
| Property | Default Value | Description

| `id`
| `""`
| Empty string - should be set to unique identifier

| `source`
| `URI.create("")`
| Empty URI - should be set to event source

| `type`
| `""`
| Empty string - should be set to event type

| `dataContentType`
| `null`
| Optional data content type

| `dataSchema`
| `null`
| Optional data schema URI

| `subject`
| `null`
| Optional event subject

| `time`
| `null`
| Optional event timestamp

| `cePrefix`
| `CloudEventsHeaders.CE_PREFIX`
| Default is CloudEventsHeaders.CE_PREFIX.
|===

[[cloudevent-extensions-pattern-matching]]
==== Cloud Event Extension Pattern Matching

The transformer allows the user to specify what `MessageHeaders` will be added as extensions to the CloudEvent.  The extension system uses pattern matching for extension identification:

[source,java]
----
// Include headers starting with "key-" or "external-"
// Exclude headers starting with "internal-"
// If the header key is neither of the above it is not included in the extensions.
String[] patterns = {"key-*", "external-*", "!internal-*"};

// Extension patterns are processed during transformation
ToCloudEventTransformer transformer = new ToCloudEventTransformer(
    new CloudEventMessageFormatStrategy(),
    patterns
);
----

[[cloudevent-extensions-pattern-syntax]]
==== Pattern Syntax

The pattern matching supports:

* **Wildcard patterns**: Use `\*` for wildcard matching (e.g., `external-\*` matches `external-id`, `external-span`)
* **Negation patterns**: Use `!` prefix for exclusion (e.g., `!internal-*` excludes internal headers)
* If the header key is neither of the above it is left in the `MessageHeader`.
* **Multiple patterns**: Use comma-delimited patterns (e.g., `{"user-\*", "session-\*" , "!debug-*"}`)
* **Null handling**: Null patterns disable extension processing, thus no `MessageHeaders` are moved to the CloudEvent extensions.

[[cloudevent-transformer-integration]]
=== Integration with Spring Integration Flows

The CloudEvent transformer integrates with Spring Integration flows:

==== Basic Flow

[source,java]
----
@Bean
public IntegrationFlow cloudEventTransformFlow() {
    return IntegrationFlows
        .from("inputChannel")
        .transform(cloudEventTransformer())
        .channel("outputChannel")
        .get();
}
----

[[cloudevent-transformer-transformation-process]]
=== Transformation Process

The transformer follows the process below:

1. **Extension Extraction**: Extract CloudEvent extensions from message headers using configured patterns
2. **CloudEvent Building**: Build a CloudEvent with configured properties and message payload
3. **Format Conversion**: Apply the specified `FormatStrategy` to format the output

==== Payload Handling

The transformer supports multiple payload types:

[source,java]
----
// String payload
Message<String> stringMessage = MessageBuilder.withPayload("Hello World").build();

// Byte array payload
Message<byte[]> binaryMessage = MessageBuilder.withPayload("Hello".getBytes()).build();

// Object payload (converted to string then bytes)
Message<Object> objectMessage = MessageBuilder.withPayload(customObject).build();
----

[[cloudevent-transformer-examples]]
=== Examples

[[cloudevent-transformer-example-basic]]
==== Basic Message Transformation

[source,java]
----
// Input message with headers
Message<String> inputMessage = MessageBuilder
    .withPayload("Hello CloudEvents")
    .setHeader("trace-id", "abc123")
    .setHeader("user-session", "session456")
    .build();

// Transformer with extension patterns
ToCloudEventTransformer transformer = new ToCloudEventTransformer(
    new CloudEventMessageFormatStrategy(), "trace-*");
// Configure properties
transformer.setId("event-123");
transformer.setSource(URI.create("https://example.com"));
transformer.setType("com.example.MessageProcessed");

// Transform to CloudEvent
Message<?> cloudEventMessage = transformer.transform(inputMessage);
----

Commit message:

Simplify CloudEvent formatting with SDK-based strategies
Remove custom CloudEvent converter infrastructure and replace with
direct CloudEvents SDK format implementations to reduce code
complexity and maintenance burden.

Key changes:
- Add `FormatStrategy` implementations for JSON, XML, and Avro
  formats using CloudEvents SDK serializers directly
- Move `FormatStrategy` interface to root cloudevents package for
  better discoverability
- Remove custom `CloudEventMessageConverter` and associated reader/
  writer classes that duplicated SDK functionality
- Add support for both `FormatStrategy` and `MessageConverter` in
  `ToCloudEventTransformer` via dual constructor pattern
- Consolidate tests and remove redundant test coverage for deleted
  converter infrastructure
- Update reference documentation to reflect simplified API
- Add type validation for CloudEvent attributes (id, source, type)
  with error messages
- Cache format instances as static final fields in strategy classes
  to avoid repeated object creation

src/reference/antora/modules/ROOT/pages/cloudevents-transform.adoc, after:

[[cloudevents-transformer]]

= CloudEvent Transformer

[[introduction]]
== Introduction

The CloudEvent transformer converts Spring Integration messages into CloudEvent compliant messages.
This transformer provides  support for the CloudEvents specification v1.0 with configurable output formats, header pattern matching, and extension management.

[[cloudevent-transformer-overview]]
=== Overview

The CloudEvent transformer (`ToCloudEventTransformer`) extends Spring Integration's `AbstractTransformer` to convert messages to CloudEvent format.
To do this, it uses `FormatStrategy`'s that allows users to serialize the payload with the CloudEvent for the following types.(JSON, XML, AVRO, etc).
You can also specify your own `Converter` or the `CloudEventMessageConverter` provided by the CloudEvents Java SDK client.

[[cloudevent-transformer-conversion-types]]
=== Format Strategy

The `ToCloudEventTransformer` accepts classes that implement the `MessageConverter`  to serialize CloudEvent data to formats other than the default `CloudEventMessageConverter`.

[[configure-transformer]]
=== Configuring Transformer

The `ToCloudEventTransformer` class provides configurations for CloudEvent metadata and formatting options.

==== Properties Configuration

[source,java]
----
ToCloudEventTransformer cloudEventTransformer = new ToCloudEventTransformer(new JsonFormatStrategy(), "id_", "source_*", "type_", patterns);
cloudEventTransformer.setDefaultId("id-123");                               // Set a default id if one is not found in message.
cloudEventTransformer.setDataContentType("application/json");                // The data content type. Default is null.
cloudEventTransformer.setDataSchema(URI.create("https://example.com/schema")); // The data schema. Default is null.
cloudEventTransformer.setSubject("order-processing");                        // The event subject. Default is null.
cloudEventTransformer.setTime(OffsetDateTime.now());                         // The event time. Default is null.
----

[[cloudevent-properties-defaults]]
==== Default Values

|===
| Property | Default Value | Description

| `defaultId`
| null
| Establishes a default id for the cloud event if none is found in the message.  If not set and no id is found in the message a `IllegalStateException` is thrown.

| `defaultSource`
| null
| Establishes a default source for the cloud event if none is found in the message.  If not set and no source is found in the message a `IllegalStateException` is thrown.

| `type`
| null
| Establishes a default type for the cloud event if none is found in the message.  If not set and no type is found in the message a `IllegalStateException` is thrown.

| `dataContentType`
| `null`
| Optional data content type

| `dataSchema`
| `null`
| Optional data schema URI

| `subject`
| `null`
| Optional event subject

| `time`
| `null`
| Optional event timestamp
|===

[[cloudevent-extensions-pattern-matching]]
==== Cloud Event Extension Pattern Matching

The transformer allows the user to specify what `MessageHeaders` will be added as extensions to the CloudEvent.  The extension system uses pattern matching for extension identification:

[source,java]
----
// Include headers starting with "key-" or "external-"
// Exclude headers starting with "internal-"
// If the header key is neither of the above it is not included in the extensions.
String[] patterns = {"key-*", "external-*", "!internal-*"};

// Extension patterns are processed during transformation
ToCloudEventTransformer transformer = new ToCloudEventTransformer(
    new XmlFormatStrategy(), "id_", "source_*", "type_", patterns);
----

[[cloudevent-extensions-pattern-syntax]]
==== Pattern Syntax

The pattern matching supports:

* **Wildcard patterns**: Use `\*` for wildcard matching (e.g., `external-\*` matches `external-id`, `external-span`)
* **Negation patterns**: Use `!` prefix for exclusion (e.g., `!internal-*` excludes internal headers)
* If the header key is neither of the above it is left in the `MessageHeader`.
* **Multiple patterns**: Use comma-delimited patterns (e.g., `{"user-\*", "session-\*" , "!debug-*"}`)
* **Null handling**: Null patterns disable extension processing, thus no `MessageHeaders` are moved to the CloudEvent extensions.

[[cloudevent-transformer-integration]]
=== Integration with Spring Integration Flows

The CloudEvent transformer integrates with Spring Integration flows:

==== Basic Flow

[source,java]
----
@Bean
public IntegrationFlow cloudEventTransformFlow() {
    return IntegrationFlows
        .from("inputChannel")
        .transform(cloudEventTransformer())
        .channel("outputChannel")
        .get();
}
----

[[cloudevent-transformer-transformation-process]]
=== Transformation Process

The transformer follows the process below:

1. **Extension Extraction**: Extract CloudEvent extensions from message headers using configured patterns
2. **CloudEvent Building**: Build a CloudEvent with configured properties and message payload
3. **Format Conversion**: Apply the specified `MessageConverter` to format the output

==== Payload Handling

The transformer supports multiple payload types:

[source,java]
----
// String payload
Message<String> stringMessage = MessageBuilder.withPayload("Hello World").build();

// Byte array payload
Message<byte[]> binaryMessage = MessageBuilder.withPayload("Hello".getBytes()).build();

// Object payload (converted to string then bytes)
Message<Object> objectMessage = MessageBuilder.withPayload(customObject).build();
----

[[cloudevent-transformer-examples]]
=== Examples

[[cloudevent-transformer-example-basic]]
==== Basic Message Transformation

[source,java]
----
// Input message with headers
Message<String> inputMessage = MessageBuilder
    .withPayload("Hello CloudEvents")
    .setHeader("trace-id", "abc123")
    .setHeader("user-session", "session456")
    .setHeader("id_test", "123")
    .setHeader("source_test", "test-source")
    .setHeader("type_test", "test-type")
    .build();

// Transformer with extension patterns
ToCloudEventTransformer transformer = new ToCloudEventTransformer(
    new CloudEventMessageConverter(), "id_*", "source_*", "type_*", "trace-*");

// Transform to CloudEvent
Message<?> cloudEventMessage = transformer.transform(inputMessage);
----
